Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
ADAM: A METHOD FOR STOCHASTIC OPTIMIZATION
Diederik P. Kingma*
University of Amsterdam, OpenAI
dpkingma@openai.com
Jimmy Lei Ba∗
University of Toronto
jimmy@psi.utoronto.ca
ABSTRACT
We introduce Adam, an algorithm for ﬁrst-order gradient-based optimization of
stochastic objective functions, based on adaptive estimates of lower-order mo-
ments. The method is straightforward to implement, is computationally efﬁcient,
has little memory requirements, is invariant to diagonal rescaling of the gradients,
and is well suited for problems that are large in terms of data and/or parameters.
The method is also appropriate for non-stationary objectives and problems with
very noisy and/or sparse gradients. The hyper-parameters have intuitive interpre-
tations and typically require little tuning. Some connections to related algorithms,
on which Adam was inspired, are discussed. We also analyze the theoretical con-
vergence properties of the algorithm and provide a regret bound on the conver-
gence rate that is comparable to the best known results under the online convex
optimization framework. Empirical results demonstrate that Adam works well in
practice and compares favorably to other stochastic optimization methods. Finally,
we discuss AdaMax, a variant of Adam based on the inﬁnity norm.
1
INTRODUCTION
Stochastic gradient-based optimization is of core practical importance in many ﬁelds of science and
engineering. Many problems in these ﬁelds can be cast as the optimization of some scalar parameter-
ized objective function requiring maximization or minimization with respect to its parameters. If the
function is differentiable w.r.t. its parameters, gradient descent is a relatively efﬁcient optimization
method, since the computation of ﬁrst-order partial derivatives w.r.t. all the parameters is of the same
computational complexity as just evaluating the function. Often, objective functions are stochastic.
For example, many objective functions are composed of a sum of subfunctions evaluated at different
subsamples of data; in this case optimization can be made more efﬁcient by taking gradient steps
w.r.t. individual subfunctions, i.e. stochastic gradient descent (SGD) or ascent. SGD proved itself
as an efﬁcient and effective optimization method that was central in many machine learning success
stories, such as recent advances in deep learning (Deng et al., 2013; Krizhevsky et al., 2012; Hinton
& Salakhutdinov, 2006; Hinton et al., 2012a; Graves et al., 2013). Objectives may also have other
sources of noise than data subsampling, such as dropout (Hinton et al., 2012b) regularization. For
all such noisy objectives, efﬁcient stochastic optimization techniques are required. The focus of this
paper is on the optimization of stochastic objectives with high-dimensional parameters spaces. In
these cases, higher-order optimization methods are ill-suited, and discussion in this paper will be
restricted to ﬁrst-order methods.
We propose Adam, a method for efﬁcient stochastic optimization that only requires ﬁrst-order gra-
dients with little memory requirement. The method computes individual adaptive learning rates for
different parameters from estimates of ﬁrst and second moments of the gradients; the name Adam
is derived from adaptive moment estimation. Our method is designed to combine the advantages
of two recently popular methods: AdaGrad (Duchi et al., 2011), which works well with sparse gra-
dients, and RMSProp (Tieleman & Hinton, 2012), which works well in on-line and non-stationary
settings; important connections to these and other stochastic optimization methods are clariﬁed in
section 5. Some of Adam’s advantages are that the magnitudes of parameter updates are invariant to
rescaling of the gradient, its stepsizes are approximately bounded by the stepsize hyperparameter,
it does not require a stationary objective, it works with sparse gradients, and it naturally performs a
form of step size annealing.
∗Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin ﬂip over a Google Hangout.
1
arXiv:1412.6980v9  [cs.LG]  30 Jan 2017
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
Algorithm 1: Adam, our proposed algorithm for stochastic optimization. See section 2 for details,
and for a slightly more efﬁcient (but less clear) order of computation. g2
t indicates the elementwise
square gt ⊙gt. Good default settings for the tested machine learning problems are α = 0.001,
β1 = 0.9, β2 = 0.999 and ϵ = 10−8. All operations on vectors are element-wise. With βt
1 and βt
2
we denote β1 and β2 to the power t.
Require: α: Stepsize
Require: β1, β2 ∈[0, 1): Exponential decay rates for the moment estimates
Require: f(θ): Stochastic objective function with parameters θ
Require: θ0: Initial parameter vector
m0 ←0 (Initialize 1st moment vector)
v0 ←0 (Initialize 2nd moment vector)
t ←0 (Initialize timestep)
while θt not converged do
t ←t + 1
gt ←∇θft(θt−1) (Get gradients w.r.t. stochastic objective at timestep t)
mt ←β1 · mt−1 + (1 −β1) · gt (Update biased ﬁrst moment estimate)
vt ←β2 · vt−1 + (1 −β2) · g2
t (Update biased second raw moment estimate)
bmt ←mt/(1 −βt
1) (Compute bias-corrected ﬁrst moment estimate)
bvt ←vt/(1 −βt
2) (Compute bias-corrected second raw moment estimate)
θt ←θt−1 −α · bmt/(√bvt + ϵ) (Update parameters)
end while
return θt (Resulting parameters)
In section 2 we describe the algorithm and the properties of its update rule. Section 3 explains
our initialization bias correction technique, and section 4 provides a theoretical analysis of Adam’s
convergence in online convex programming. Empirically, our method consistently outperforms other
methods for a variety of models and datasets, as shown in section 6. Overall, we show that Adam is
a versatile algorithm that scales to large-scale high-dimensional machine learning problems.
2
ALGORITHM
See algorithm 1 for pseudo-code of our proposed algorithm Adam. Let f(θ) be a noisy objec-
tive function: a stochastic scalar function that is differentiable w.r.t. parameters θ. We are in-
terested in minimizing the expected value of this function, E[f(θ)] w.r.t. its parameters θ. With
f1(θ), ..., , fT (θ) we denote the realisations of the stochastic function at subsequent timesteps
1, ..., T. The stochasticity might come from the evaluation at random subsamples (minibatches)
of datapoints, or arise from inherent function noise. With gt = ∇θft(θ) we denote the gradient, i.e.
the vector of partial derivatives of ft, w.r.t θ evaluated at timestep t.
The algorithm updates exponential moving averages of the gradient (mt) and the squared gradient
(vt) where the hyper-parameters β1, β2 ∈[0, 1) control the exponential decay rates of these moving
averages. The moving averages themselves are estimates of the 1st moment (the mean) and the
2nd raw moment (the uncentered variance) of the gradient. However, these moving averages are
initialized as (vectors of) 0’s, leading to moment estimates that are biased towards zero, especially
during the initial timesteps, and especially when the decay rates are small (i.e. the βs are close to 1).
The good news is that this initialization bias can be easily counteracted, resulting in bias-corrected
estimates bmt and bvt. See section 3 for more details.
Note that the efﬁciency of algorithm 1 can, at the expense of clarity, be improved upon by changing
the order of computation, e.g. by replacing the last three lines in the loop with the following lines:
αt = α ·
p
1 −βt
2/(1 −βt
1) and θt ←θt−1 −αt · mt/(√vt + ˆϵ).
2.1
ADAM’S UPDATE RULE
An important property of Adam’s update rule is its careful choice of stepsizes. Assuming ϵ = 0, the
effective step taken in parameter space at timestep t is ∆t = α · bmt/√bvt. The effective stepsize has
two upper bounds: |∆t| ≤α · (1 −β1)/√1 −β2 in the case (1 −β1) > √1 −β2, and |∆t| ≤α
2
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
otherwise. The ﬁrst case only happens in the most severe case of sparsity: when a gradient has
been zero at all timesteps except at the current timestep. For less sparse cases, the effective stepsize
will be smaller. When (1 −β1) = √1 −β2 we have that | bmt/√bvt| < 1 therefore |∆t| < α. In
more common scenarios, we will have that bmt/√bvt ≈±1 since |E[g]/
p
E[g2]| ≤1. The effective
magnitude of the steps taken in parameter space at each timestep are approximately bounded by
the stepsize setting α, i.e., |∆t| ⪅α. This can be understood as establishing a trust region around
the current parameter value, beyond which the current gradient estimate does not provide sufﬁcient
information. This typically makes it relatively easy to know the right scale of α in advance. For
many machine learning models, for instance, we often know in advance that good optima are with
high probability within some set region in parameter space; it is not uncommon, for example, to
have a prior distribution over the parameters. Since α sets (an upper bound of) the magnitude of
steps in parameter space, we can often deduce the right order of magnitude of α such that optima
can be reached from θ0 within some number of iterations. With a slight abuse of terminology,
we will call the ratio bmt/√bvt the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). With a smaller SNR the effective
stepsize ∆t will be closer to zero. This is a desirable property, since a smaller SNR means that
there is greater uncertainty about whether the direction of bmt corresponds to the direction of the true
gradient. For example, the SNR value typically becomes closer to 0 towards an optimum, leading
to smaller effective steps in parameter space: a form of automatic annealing. The effective stepsize
∆t is also invariant to the scale of the gradients; rescaling the gradients g with factor c will scale bmt
with a factor c and bvt with a factor c2, which cancel out: (c · bmt)/(√
c2 · bvt) = bmt/√bvt.
3
INITIALIZATION BIAS CORRECTION
As explained in section 2, Adam utilizes initialization bias correction terms. We will here derive
the term for the second moment estimate; the derivation for the ﬁrst moment estimate is completely
analogous. Let g be the gradient of the stochastic objective f, and we wish to estimate its second
raw moment (uncentered variance) using an exponential moving average of the squared gradient,
with decay rate β2. Let g1, ..., gT be the gradients at subsequent timesteps, each a draw from an
underlying gradient distribution gt ∼p(gt). Let us initialize the exponential moving average as
v0 = 0 (a vector of zeros). First note that the update at timestep t of the exponential moving average
vt = β2 · vt−1 + (1 −β2) · g2
t (where g2
t indicates the elementwise square gt ⊙gt) can be written as
a function of the gradients at all previous timesteps:
vt = (1 −β2)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
2
· g2
i
(1)
We wish to know how E[vt], the expected value of the exponential moving average at timestep t,
relates to the true second moment E[g2
t ], so we can correct for the discrepancy between the two.
Taking expectations of the left-hand and right-hand sides of eq. (1):
E[vt] = E
"
(1 −β2)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
2
· g2
i
#
(2)
= E[g2
t ] · (1 −β2)
t
X
i=1
βt−i
2
+ ζ
(3)
= E[g2
t ] · (1 −βt
2) + ζ
(4)
where ζ = 0 if the true second moment E[g2
i ] is stationary; otherwise ζ can be kept small since
the exponential decay rate β1 can (and should) be chosen such that the exponential moving average
assigns small weights to gradients too far in the past. What is left is the term (1 −βt
2) which is
caused by initializing the running average with zeros. In algorithm 1 we therefore divide by this
term to correct the initialization bias.
In case of sparse gradients, for a reliable estimate of the second moment one needs to average over
many gradients by chosing a small value of β2; however it is exactly this case of small β2 where a
lack of initialisation bias correction would lead to initial steps that are much larger.
3
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2015
4
